# Prototype 1 Design Journal

This first prototype, "Where's the Washroom?" explores a question that is central to both level design and real-world environment design; namely, that of wayfinding. In particular, this prototype seeks to explore how minimalistic landmarks can be and still allow players to navigate the environment effectively. Dropped into an almost exclusively blocked-out version of a theme park land, and equipped only with a stylized map, players are asked to locate a bathroom they can use.

Though this task might seem challenging given the abstractedness of the scenario, there several key landmarks that should allow players to orient themselves on the map with which they are provided. In particular, this prototype makes use of what is called a "weenie" in the theme park industry: a large landmark, visible over the tops of other structures, and typically located at the far end of a park or land to draw guests onward. Examples from real theme parks include the Disney castles, various "Mountains" in Disney parks, as well as the Graumann's Chinese Theatre replica and Tower of Terror at Disney's Hollywood Studios. These tower structures provide universally visible landmarks throughout the park, much like an enormous physical "North" arrow, and consequently can be used to navigate with the aid of a park map and other minimal features of the immediate surroundings. This prototype attempts to abstract the environment as much as possible in an attempt to see, in practice, if players can still navigate as long as they have a schematically correct map and a universally visible landmark.

Questions for playtesters:

1) How long did it take you to find a washroom you could use?

2) How many washrooms did you visit before finding one you could use?

3) At any point (including immediately on starting) did you feel absolutely lost? If so, please describe how you attempted to orient yourself. Were you successful in gaining your bearings?

4) Did you ever find yourself going in a complete circle unintentionally? What made you realize you were walking in a loop?

5) Do you feel there were any significant layout discrepancies between the bird's-eye representation on the map, and the ground-level experience of the actual space? If so, what specifically were they? Were any of these discrepancies confusing for orienting yourself?

## Feedback Reflection

There are several pieces of useful information that emerged from the playtest feedback. In general, it seems pretty clear that the core hypothesis was supported, in that 6/7 playtesters described being able to successfully orient themselves using the map provided and the sparse landmarks available. Only one playtester expressed difficulty navigating, and this was ascribed to a lack of live location indicator, suggesting this was less a concern with my specific prototype and more a general deficit of cartographic literacy. In fact, even this outlier described using the map as a general sense of layout.

What's particularly interesting is that one playtester specifically recounted a series of events that suggests the provided map and landmarks were sufficient for a user to orient themselves, even when they'd made explicitly incorrect assumptions about their orientation. This specific playtester recounts, "I correctly guessed that the map was oriented correctly such that I started at the bottom and worked my way up," which is, in fact, incorrect. Rather, the player begins at the top, looking downward. However, the playtester goes on to elaborate that, "when reaching the center of the park I don't know what happened (spun around too fast maybe?) but I was thinking that north was south. Using the landmarks (tree and mountain) I re-oriented myself." In this scenario, they clearly thought North was South because the landmarks contra-indicated their previous assumptions regarding orientation. Given this discrepancy, they were able to re-orient and finish their playtest under correct assumptions about their orientation.

One pattern that stood out when analyzing completion times and number of washrooms visited was that completion times are surprisingly clustered, around 98 +/- 2 seconds, 147 +/- 10, and then a couple above 600 seconds. These clusters also loosely correlate to number of washrooms visited. This perhaps suggests that once players were able to orient themselves, they were able to plan paths through the environment that resulted in remarkable consistency between runs, optimizing distance traveled between washrooms. This would imply that once bearings are obtained, players are able to manipulate this sense of position in space to reach their goal with a high degree of competence, despite the paucity of landmarks.

Finally, it's interesting to see how players were able to create an understanding of the physical environment, despite its low fidelity, with the help of the map. Several playtesters correctly identified the object at the center of the map as a tree, and one even correctly identified a corner of the map as a rest area, despite only having cylinders and cubes to suggest tables and seating. Although these features were lightly illustrated on the map, the response of playtesters suggests they are also able to inform their interpretation of the environment with their previous experience of such public spaces, understanding the kinds of spatial arrangements that might be implied by a cylinder and ball in the center of a square or a myriad of cubes in a plaza. Presumably, one might even be able to push the minimalism of level design even further by leveraging this pre-existing framework of knowledge regarding public space layout. 
